Understanding Mixed Reality and how it can be exploited
-Jairam R Prabhu

Today as we speak about the world around us, we can say we live in some kind of reality. The definition of reality itself is abstract. Reality points out the existence of something and nullifying other theories.
In the twenty-first century we know, we use all types of gadgets- laptops, mobile phones, smart TVs, smartwatches, etc. These have created something which we know as the digital or virtual world. It may or may not be the reality but such a world exists behind the screen. It matters to us as it creates an influence in our lives even if it may not be the reality, we are in. Virtual Reality is a contemporary technology where we Human Beings are able to get the feel of a fantasy world.
In recent times, we can a new term propping up, called Mixed Reality which is nothing but a confluence of Reality and Virtual Reality leading to the creation of new environments and situations. Ideally, Mixed Reality should stand for a situation where we are unable to differentiate between reality and virtual objects. The technology now isn’t up to that mark to give us such experience. Mixed Reality even today is on paper as a prototype which we will have to improve upon and bring it to life.
Bringing it to reality
Coming to the realisation of Mixed Reality, it needs to mix the concept of Virtual Reality as well as give an interactive experience like Augmented Reality. This artificial environment will give rise to what we know as Mixed Reality. Using any device, like a VR box or helmet must be able to give us the required effect and in return, we can interact with it. Such an idea is being popularly discussed in the scientific spheres. We have all played the popular game- Pokémon Go, where we were able to catch Pokémon from the streets. This is an example of the combination of Virtual and Augmented Reality. Apple, Niantic, Microsoft are the top tech giants contributing to this field.
Applications of Mixed Reality
COVID-19 pandemic taught us how important is Virtual World as well as how needful is human and interpersonal interaction. Mixed Reality will be able to bridge that gap. When schools, colleges and offices went online, what lacked was the real-life experience associated with it. To make online classes lively, Mixed Reality will be able to bring faraway objects closer. Imagine being in a classroom surrounded by your friends who are still in their homes. Their presence is nothing but a virtual object in real life. Similarly, we can emulate a workplace, office, assemblies and lot more.
Mixed Reality based shops and e-commerce is another big application which we can bring. Imagine being able to visit a shop and choosing your favourite product without actually having to travel there. Imagine visiting different places, buildings, landmarks etc. without having to spend anything. It will help us travel to a fantasy world and experience it without any difficulty.
Coming to Science and Technology, Mixed Reality can help us build large labs or simulators without actually having to disturb the surroundings. It will also be cheap to conduct experiments, make assumptions etc. It will also help architects and civil engineers to visualise their designs. This will help them construct a prototype of what they want to build without having it built. The animation, design and gaming industry will see a big boom. Demand for 3D modelling will shoot up and be a great opportunity for everyone.
 
In the healthcare sector, we can see that Mixed Reality can easily be exploited in learning intricate details of the human body, marine biology, understanding forests, and various climatic conditions. A 3D view of the same will really be helpful for everyone to comprehend easily.
Understanding Mixed Reality and using it to implement it in different fields for various applications should be the primary role of us as technical enthusiasts. Today, companies are investing a lot in Research and Development, which will positively help us extract and utilise the technology so that it will be beneficial to us and mankind at large. Being a growing field, the potential of the field is yet to be exploited for the larger good. 
